2.672:2.672:Writing a technical paperProf. Wai Cheng
DepartmentofMechanicalEngineeringMIT
Department of Mechanical Engineering, MIT
Elements of a technical paper ppŁTitle
ŁAbstract
ŁIntroduction
ŁTheoretical background

ŁApparatus and procedureppp
ŁResults and discussion

ŁConclusionsConclusionsŁNomenclature (optional)

ŁReferencesReferencesŁAppendices (optional)

2.672 writinggŁIndividual reporting
ŒYoushareideas,dataandresultswithyour
You share ideas, data and results with your group members.  You need to write your 
own project report though.ŁWriting style
Avoid subjective comments, and use of personal 
pronouns; use passive voice instead
Write directly, avoid words that are not useful 
suchas:
such as:ﬁIn order toﬂ
ﬁthe purpose of this experiment is toﬂ
No. of significant figures in numbers should 
reflect accuracy of measurement

Paper versus reportppŁReport
Usuallyforinternaluse
ŒUsually for internal useŒDocument details of the project for archival 
purposepurposeInclude details: drawings, computer programs
ŁPaperŁPaperŒFor external audience
Succinctandtothepoint
ŒSuccinct and to the pointDo not need to write about routine details such 
as calibration procedure etc.
pDo not put computer program listing in a paper 

TitleŁThe title is what draws reader to your work
ŒReveal the topic of the paper
ŒShould include key words about the projectyjŁMake the title interesting and attractive

AbstractŁBrief condensation of the paper
Œ150 Œ200 words
ŒDo notexplain why the study is done in the 
yyabstractŁWhat was done?
ŁHow was it done?

ŁWhat are the si
gnificant resultsg
IntroductionŁIntroduces subject
ŒBackground and context
ŒArticulate the need for the studyyŒClearly define the problem (purpose of the 
investigation)ŒBriefly outline overall approach

Theoretical background(Should use a more meaningful heading than theoretical background)ŁPhysical explanation of the phenomena involved
ŁDevelop governing equations
ŒAssumptions: support them quantitatively
e.g. laminar flow Šgive Re
ŒDescribe model development
Give the key equations only; put details in the 
diappendixŁConnect your theory to your project
Whhillbd
ŒWhat t
heoretical values are to be compared to experimental results?
Apparatus and procedureppp
ŁOverview of operation
ŒRefer to a schematic to explain the operation
ŒGive dimension of apparatus
Relationship between the laboratory device and 
the real device
ŒWhat are being measured?
Do not need to give details about transducers if 
theyarecommondevices
they are common devicesŁExperimental matrix
Whatarethevariablesandwhatrangehas
ŒWhat are the variables and what range has been covered?
Results and discussionResultsUfi
ŁUse figuresŁDescribe the direct observation first (e.g. 
ti)
pressure vs. time)ŒPoint out the features and the physics behind 
themthemŁShow how do the results change when you 
changethevariablesoftheexperiment
change the variables of the experimentŒMagnitude (up or down; by how much?)
Trendsandscalinglaws
ŒTrends and scaling lawslinear, exponential, –
Results and discussionDiscussionŁDoes theory produce the same features as the 
observations?ŁPlot theoretical values on the same graph as the 
experimental resultsElithdiff
ŒExplain the differencesŁMake the results (theory and experiment) 
useful
ConclusionsŁSummary of your finding
ŁPronounce your judgment
ŒWhat are the ke
y parameters?yŒHow are the results related to these 
parametersŒHow good is your model? What does it 
capture?ŒHow does your study contribute to the 
objective stated in your introduction?
AppendicesppŁDetails that your reader may not need to 
follow the overall picture but are required to 
support your workŁNeed have narrative to describe any 
equation, table, or graph in the appendix